---
author: Mark Ricalde
title: Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban
date: "2024-12-24"
---
The book by J.K. Rowling, “Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban”, follows Harry’s third
year at Hogwarts, where he discovers that an escaped prisoner named Sirius Black is believed to be after him. With the help of Hermione Granger and Ron Weasley, Harry uncovers the truths about his family, including Sirius’s innocence and Peter Pettigrew’s betrayal, who had been disguised as Ron’s pet rat. They help Sirius escape by saving Buckbeak the hippogriff using Hermione’s time-turner. The story is about friendship, bravery, and the search for truth, as they stand up for justice despite facing difficult circumstances along their journey. It highlights the importance of loyalty and the power of discovering one’s true identity.

### Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban by J.K. Rowling: A Critique Through Archetypal Criticism
A key element in many stories feature a young hero facing challenges, and Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban shows this idea well. One of the similarities that this story shares with other stories is that a young hero faces challenges within the story. Most stories revolve around a school setup where characters learn and develop, which is something Harry experienced at Hogwarts. The element of a mysterious figure returning from the past is also widely used in stories, such as family secrets or hidden identities. Characters such as Harry, Hermione, and Ron also mirror the classic friendship trio found in most stories, with loyalty and bravery attributes. Even the magical elements are common features in traditional fairy tales and myths based on a journey through strange worlds. Although the story is unique, it still follows common storytelling patterns that make readers relatable.

The story portrays some human concerns, including fear of the unknown and a journey to find oneself. Characters have to deal with issues of betrayal and trust, demonstrating how relationships can be complicated and painful. Harry's journey reflects the common worry of being different and the desire to fit in, which many people experience during their formative years. The pursuit of truth and knowledge has become the main theme since people seek to discover their past and find out who they are. Choices lead to a result that teaches individuals how essential it is to be wise. In general, the story connects with readers that makes the characters' experiences feel real and relevant.

To understand how these connect with readers, it helps to look at archetypes, which are common characters or patterns that show up in stories and reflect shared human experiences. Callaghan (2022) states character archetype is a familiar type of character that represents universal aspects of the human experience. These familiar patterns help people connect with the story by representing common human experiences. According to Heckmann (2023), a hero is a person who shares a deep commitment to their morals, no matter the consequence. Harry commits to his beliefs, especially when he decides to trust Sirius Black, even though it is risky and others warn him against it. He always does what he thinks is right, even if it means going against authority or putting himself in danger. His loyalty and bravery drive him to protect his friends and find the truth, no matter what happens.

A mother is often seen as a protector, disciplinarian, and friend, providing unconditional love and support (Diranian, 2017). Molly Weasley symbolizes the archetype of the mother through her concern for her family, including Harry. She provides a warm and caring home for Harry, offering him comfort and protection as if he were her child. Throughout the book, Molly Weasley's actions reflect the selfless love and care that define the archetypal mother figure.

From the beginning, Hermione Granger and Ron Weasley embody the archetypal helper, offering unwavering support to Harry throughout his journey. Hermione, with her sharp intellect and quick thinking, often provides solutions to the trio's dilemmas. Ron, though less academically inclined, contributes his loyalty and emotional support, consistently standing by Harry in moments of danger. Their deep friendship symbolizes the essence of the helper archetype, empowering him to confront challenges that would otherwise be unachievable.

Riddle (2023) mentions that a scapegoat in a story is a character who gets blamed or punished for things they did not do. This character takes the blame for problems that happen to others, even though they are not responsible for them. Sirius Black is also an archetypal scapegoat character in the story. He is a character who gets blamed for something he did not do. People accused him of betraying Harry's parents to a bad guy, Voldemort, which is a huge mistake. At first, the people at Hogwarts are afraid of Sirius because they think he wants to hurt them. However, as the story unfolds, it is revealed that Sirius is innocent and was framed by Peter Pettigrew, a friend of Harry's parents. The story shows how easily false accusations can be made and how innocent people can be blamed for others' mistakes. By making Sirius a scapegoat, the story highlights the importance of seeking the truth and not
judging people based on rumors or assumptions.

The archetype that Peter Pettigrew represents is the villain archetype because of his betrayal and dishonesty. For years, he hides in the form of Ron's pet rat, Scabbers, living in fear and avoiding responsibility for his past actions. Pettigrew's betrayal of Harry's parents, which led to their death, marks him as a coward who chose self-preservation over loyalty. Hence, his selfishness and alliance with dark forces highlight his role as the story's villain. This is strengthened by DeGuzman (2022) who says that a villain is an evil character who does harmful things or causes trouble for others. Also, the villain may believe their actions are justified based on their own beliefs, but they still cause problems and destruction. 

The story also presents another type of archetype which is situational archetype. This refers to the situations that appear in multiple stories (Writer, 2017). The initiation is a type of situational archetype that is shown in the story and it refers to the way a character is introduced into a new area of influence. Harry's journey to produce a Patronus charm symbolizes an initiation, an important moment in his growth from a young boy into a more capable young adult. Learning the spell challenges Harry to face his fears and emotional struggles. His success in casting the Patronus shows his personal growth and his readiness to face bigger challenges in the future.

The Time-Turner represents the task archetype, where Harry and Hermione must complete a challenging and important mission. This magical device, which allows them to travel through time, plays a key role in saving Sirius Black and Buckbeak. The task needs careful planning and the ability to manage different timelines, showing their growth and courage. 

Another archetypal situation is the battle between good and evil, when Harry has to confront Dementors first, and later on with Sirius. This conflict relates to the personal choice and responsibility that the characters have to make about whom to trust and how they will define themselves. Both situations depict the struggle between innocence and experience and advance further in the message that can be drawn from this story relating to life and choices.

According to Anthony (2024), the fall is an archetype that involves a character’s descent from a higher to a lower state, often due to a moral or ethical failing. The fall archetype happens when Remus Lupin's secret of being a werewolf is revealed. Lupin, who has been a trusted teacher to Harry and his friends, faces a fall when people find out about his condition, causing them to lose trust in him. This moment changes his life and it makes him leave Hogwarts and shows how his hidden secret led to his downfall.

The last type of archetype that the story has is the archetypal images. One archetypal image in the story is the "Dark Forest." This image symbolizes mystery and danger where heroes face their fears and grow. When Harry and his friends go into the Forbidden Forest, they meet frightening creatures which symbolizes challenges they need to overcome to gain courage and understanding.

Another archetypal image is the sun, which stands for hope and new beginnings. It contrasts with the cold and dark moments caused by the Dementors, showing safety and light. The Sun’s presence during peaceful times at Hogwarts reminds us of the strength of hope, even in hard situations.

Color symbolism is the use of colors to represent powerful meanings in different cultures, art, stories, and writings (ActionSymbolism, 2023). To show the different symbolism and important meaning in the story, colors black, white, and gold add depth to the story. Black represents mystery, danger, and fear that is seen in Sirius Black, whose name brings suspicion. Also, Dementors, whose black cloaks show despair and fear. White stands for hope and protection which fights against the darkness of the Dementors, and in the peaceful snowy grounds of Hogwarts. The white moon also ties to Remus Lupin’s change, showing the mix of innocence and danger. Gold represents success and magic, seen in the golden glow of the Time-Turner, which stands for second chances, and in Gryffindor’s colors, symbolizing bravery and victory. Together, these colors help show the battle between fear and hope and the victory of courage over darkness.

The learning in this criticism of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban shows how using common character types and symbols makes the story stronger. These familiar characters and themes help readers connect with the story and understand its message better. The story teaches important lessons about friendship, loyalty, bravery, and finding oneself, showing how facing challenges can help a person grow.