---
title: The song of achilles
date: "2024-12-17"
author: Hannieh Garcia
---

Madeline Miller’s The Song of Achilles brings Achilles and Patroclus to life in a way that feels real and human. Their love story is both heartbreaking and beautiful. I love how the author showed their struggles with destiny, their weaknesses, and the strong love they had for each other. The focus on their emotions made their relationship feel real and heartfelt. I felt a strong sense of sadness and helplessness because Patroclus chose to fight in Achilles’ place out of his love and loyalty, but it led to tragedy. The author showed the selflessness and loyalty of Patroclus, which made his death even more painful to read. What I loved most was the emotional impact of his sacrifice because it was both sad and beautiful. While there wasn’t anything I disliked about the book, their tragic ending left me feeling deeply upset and heartbroken. The conclusion left me feeling both sad and thankful for the love they shared, even though it didn’t last.

This story connects to my life because it shows how much we are willing to give up for the people we love. The decision of Patroclus to take Achilles’ place reminds me all the times I have put others first, without thinking about the risks that will follow doing so. He has a pure love and loyalty, and it made me reflect about my own relationships with others, especially when having the urge to decide and make tough choices for them.

The desire to protect someone you care about even if it will cost you is something I can relate to. The story also reminded me of how love can be really complicated because no matter how much we care about someone, fate or life may get in the way. I’ve experienced getting close to people only for time and distance to pull us apart. This theme of loving despite knowing it won’t last made me think about how important it is to value the time we have with those we love.

Patroclus acted out of love and a sense of duty to Achilles. He couldn’t watch his friends die without doing something, so he stepped in, believing he could make a difference. His choice came from his loyalty and the belief that he was the only one who could help. And I think his brave act made Achilles feel protective, leading him to seek revenge on Hector. Both of them struggled between their personal feelings and the bigger forces of fate they couldn’t control.

If I will be in the place of Patroclus, I think I would feel torn between wanting to protect someone I love and being afraid of what might happen to me. While he acted selflessly, I would hope that I could be as brave as him because there are instances that I would be thinking more carefully about the consequences before doing something. And if I were in the place of Achilles, having the love of my life sacrifice for me would make me feel the grief, but I will surely honor the love and sacrifice of the person that I love without causing any harm to other people.

I think the novel is meant for readers who enjoy stories about love, loss, specifically angst, and Greek mythology. Its deep emotions, themes, and focus on human struggles would appeal to people who like stories about romantic relationships and new ways of seeing myths. It might also connect with young adults and older readers who have gone through love, loss, or being in the situation to make difficult choices in their lives.

The characters, especially Patroclus, felt real to me, which surprised me because they are part of the famous Greek mythological figures. What stood out most was Patroclus’ loyalty. He was admired for being a strong warrior and for how deep his love for Achilles is. He did not hesitate to risk his life for Achilles, even though he knew that it could lead to his own death. At first, I felt bad for Patroclus and somehow wished that he should’ve made a different choice. But upon reading more, I realized that his love for Achilles was something deep and genuine, which I could understand because we individuals really do take risks out of love.
