---
title: Windmills of the Gods
date: "2024-12-17"
author: Camille Ramilo
---

The novel Windmills of the Gods by Sidney Sheldon explores the challenges faced by women in a male-dominated field, portraying the protagonist, Mary Ashley, as a courageous and resilient figure. Following the death of her husband, Mary, a former political science professor, moves to Romania with her two children after being unexpectedly appointed as an ambassador. As she entered the world of politics, it was not as expected. She thought of it as a deadly game. Her bravery in accepting the job despite minimal experience breaks the norms of gender stereotypes of women not capable of political leadership roles. However, her strength is put to the test as male colleagues attempt to manipulate her and use her as a pawn against political enemies. Mary faces numerous obstacles, including political betrayals, assassination threats, and workplace discrimination. According to a study by Heilman et al. (2024), with full determination and stubborn persistence to show others what women are capable of doing, discrimination against them in workplaces can be escapable as gender does not necessarily lead to discrimination. Moreover, Sundaresan (2014) highlights that women are often pressured to juggle multiple responsibilities, managing work-life balance more flexibly than men. This environment exerts pressure on working women as they have no choice but to cope with multiple full-time jobs. Mary Ahsley as a single mother with a demanding career, successfully fulfills her dual roles as both a leader and a parent, further showcasing her unwavering resilience and strength.

The content of the work is unrelated to the author's gender. Although, this may be influenced by women alongside him throughout his career. His portrayal of women as strong and fearless indicates how the author pursues gender equality. The body of his works portrays women as achievers, independent, and, uniquely challenged by stereotypes but never threatened by their femininity. He uses fictional characters to represent how women are expected to learn from men, and with this, they use their education to turn against men, showing how they do not give in to patriarchal society (Dutta, 2022). 

The story also highlights contrasting approaches to societal conflict between Mary and her male counterparts. This results in a dispute between political partners. At some point in the story, few male characters believe in Mary which leads to trust and partnership, where they become Mary's right hand in fulfilling her task. One of which is Mike, where Mary mentions her companion, Mike, as whom he did not believe at first became the person she could trust the most. On the other hand, Stanton Rogers, the secretary of the state, once admired Mary for how she worked but due to his actions and decisions, led to a conflict and moment of deception for Mary which made Mary discern whom she trusted. 

This highlights how Mary’s journey challenges societal norms, as those around her consistently underestimate her abilities simply because she is a woman, a bias still common today. Similar situations can be observed in past elections, where women striving to prove their competence in politics often faced hesitation from voters due to gender biases, despite having more credible achievements and experience. Although this gradually changes through the years as they continue to advocate for their rights and equality, a time will come when they no longer need to prove their worth to critics, as they don’t easily back down from any difficulties. In Windmills of the Gods, Mary’s capabilities ultimately shine through, particularly when her superior attempts to stop her 


from quitting her job, acknowledging her value. Indicating that a person’s competency is 
not solely determined by gender but by individual ability and determination. The mocking of Mary’s superior in the earlier parts of the story only reflects the insecurity some men show when confronted with women who prove to be equally capable to them. This is showcased through her companion Mike, as he realizes her abilities of Mary, leading to a dynamic shift where he grows to trust and respect her.

Vera Gil (2024) explains that, compared to men, women make use of their resilience to excel across various fields, as they are generally more socialized to put significant effort into academics. In contrast, men do not focus academically as they see it as something that makes them less of a man. In relation to the story, Mary not only excels academically but also dedicates herself to fulfilling her professional responsibilities amidst the fear of the threats thrown at her. This challenges the  pride of men regarding their capabilities and positions in politics. Throughout her journey, Mary chooses to rise above the discrimination she encounters, using it as motivation to prove her critics wrong.
